@c $Id: template.texi,v 1.1 2004-07-12 07:14:18 franci_cz Exp $
@chapter Syntax

Tags are enclosed by @strong{<?teng} and @strong{?>} marks.

@section Comment

<!-- comment -->

Comment will not be in output file.

@section Include

<?teng include file="@emph{template.teng}" ?>

Include other template file.

@section Whitespace formating

begin of block: <?teng format space="@emph{value}" ?>
end of block: <?teng endformat ?>

Set type of formating whitespace in output file. Value of @emph{space} is one of:
@table @emph
@item nowhite
removes all whitespaces
@item onespace
collapse all whitespace characters into one space
@item striplines
removes all whitespaces at the begin and end of row except line break
@item joinlines
removes newline character and all whitespaces at begin of next row
@item nowhitelines
removes all empty rows
@item noformat
end parent space formating
@end table

@section Fragment

begin of block: <?teng frag @emph{identifier} ?>
end of block:	<?teng endfrag ?>

Basic data block for reference by application

Default variables:
@table @emph
@item @_count
number of iterations of fragment. 
@item @_number
actual count of iteration. It begins with 0 and exists only in fragment.
@item @_this
actual fragment context
@end table

@section Condicional block

begin: <?teng if @emph{expression} ?>@*
next:  <?teng elseif @emph{expression} ?>@*
next:  <?teng else ?>@*
end:   <?teng endif ?>@*
@*
@emph{Expression} is envaluated as @emph{false} if is equal to empty string, string "0" or number 0. Type of data is ignored.

@section Definition of variable

<?teng set @emph{variable}=@emph{expression} ?>
@*@*
Variable is available only in current fragment. Redefinition of variable submited by application will raise error.

@section Variable

<?teng expr @emph{$variable} ?>@*
short: $@{variable@}@*
shorter: $variable
@*@*
Include variable (data from application or defined by @strong{set} tag).
Must begin with letter or @_. Can be followed by number. Must start with $ character in expression.

Naming convetion
@table @asis
@item name
unqualified identifier. Only in local context of actual fragment
@item recipient.name
partialy qualified identifier
@item .message.recipient.name
fully qualified identifier
@end table

@section Dictionary item

<?teng expr @emph{#item} ?>@*
short: #@{item@}@*
shorter: #item

Include item from language dictionary into output.

@section Expression

<?teng expr @emph{expression} ?>@*
short: $@{expression@}
@*@*
General expression. Can by combination of data literals, variables, dictionary items, functions, operators and parentheses. Parentheses sets priority.

@section Literals

@table @asis
@item string
"Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet"
@item integer
123
@item real number (float)
123.45

